140 CORNELII NEPOTIS

large sum (say â€œ which great he had brought '')
with him. His plan was to fill (subj. of result)
jars with lead, the top of which he covered with
gold and silver. When he had made up his mind
where he would g0, he took with him the bronze
statues which he had filled with his money, while
the jars of lead were guarded in the temple by the
Gortynii, ignorant where (quo loco) the money was.

X. The Carthaginian was anxious to put the king
of Pergamum out of the way, for he thought that he
was friendly to the Romans. When they fought,
he was going to use a stratagem. He would com-
mand (periphrastic) the sailors to collect very many
poisonous serpents. On the day on which the battle
was to be fought, all would be directed to unite
their attack on the king's ship. He said that this
must be taken, and the king slain.

XI. Before the fleets were brought into action,
Hannibal harangued the soldier-S. When the mes-
senger who was sent to seek the king had returned,
both sides commenced battle. The serpents were
thrown into the ships so as to alarm the men of
Pergamum. If these had not retreated to their
naval camp, they would not have found safety.

XII. While Prusia's ambassadors were dining at
Rome, one of them told the consul where Hannibal

